Taming the Drunken Monkey: Workbook



TAMING THE DRUNKEN MONKEY: WORKBOOK


Jackie Woodall
version 1.0, 2020

Table of Contents

-   Overview
-   Novice
    -   Breathwork I
    -   Awareness I
    -   Concentration I
    -   Attitude I
    -   Flexibility I
-   Student
    -   Concentration II
    -   Awareness II
    -   Attitude II
    -   Breathwork II
    -   Flexibility II
-   Warrior
    -   Concentration III
    -   Awareness III
    -   Attitude III
    -   Breathwork III
    -   Flexibility III
-   Adept
    -   Concentration IV
    -   Awareness IV
    -   Attitude III
    -   Breathwork III
    -   Flexibility III
-   Appendix A: Progress Chart


Overview

This workbook is a companion to _Taming the Drunken Monkey: The Path to
Mindfulness, Meditation, and Increased Concentration_ © 2014 by William
L. Mikulas, PhD. Without the source text, this workbook will make little
sense.

Mastery of the mind will improve all areas of one’s life.

There are five areas of development:

1.  Concentration

2.  Awareness

3.  Mental Flexibility

4.  Attitude

5.  Breathwork

Developing concentration will help you focus your attention, control
your thoughts, and quiet your runaway mind. Developing awareness will
help you have broader and clearer awareness of your body, feelings,
thoughts, and the world around you. This awareness will lead to more
choice, control, and freedom. And developing flexibility will increase
creativity and free you from many mental blocks and biases. You will
perceive and think more clearly and freely. Breathwork helps improve the
health of the body and mind, helps relax the body and can become an
object of attention and awareness.

The book is divided into five levels of proficiency:

I.  Novice

II. Student

III. Warrior

IV. Adept

V.  Master

This is a WORKbook not a thought-book. It is important to do these
practices and not just think about them or say "another time, I’m too
busy right now". All the time spent developing these skills you will get
back many times over.

Enjoy the journey.


Novice

  In the mind of the beginner, there are many possibilities. In the mind
  of an expert, there are few.

— S Suzuki
Zen Mind, Beginner's Mind

At the novice level, the rules of the game are established and basic
instructions to the practices are outlined. Develop habits which
establish practice time, place, and form.

Breathwork I

Observe how you breath. Pay attention to the rising and falling of the
abdomen.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Spend one or two training sessions observing the movement of the
    diaphragm.

-   ❏ Spend a week of practice time just quietly observing the complete
    breath.

Moving on:

-   ❏ You can easily observe all stages of complete breathing, including
    the nose, chest, and diaphragm or stomach.

-   ❏ You can feel the difference between chest breathing and diaphragm
    breathing, and periodically intentionally shift from chest breathing
    to diaphragm breathing.

Awareness I

As you progress through this book, you will gradually become more and
more aware: more aware of your body, feelings, thoughts, and mental
processes;^([1]) and more aware of other people and the world around
you. This awareness will bring you more health, happiness, choice, and
freedom.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Answer awareness questionnaire.

-   ❏ During breathwork, put your emphasis on gradually become more and
    more aware of the fine aspects of breathing. Put your attention on
    the breath at the tip of the nose.

-   ❏ Put your attention on the rising and falling of the
    abdomen/stomach. Encourage yourself to become more and more aware of
    the body related to breathing.

-   ❏ Follow the whole cycle of breathing from the air coming in to the
    air leaving the body. Be aware of pauses and feelings.

-   ❏ Body scan at least once a day, five times a week for a few weeks.

Moving on:

-   ❏ You understand what awareness is and how it differs from thinking
    and reacting.

-   ❏ You have spent considerable time learning to become more aware of
    your breathing and body, and are now much more aware of these than
    you were when you began.

Concentration I

Concentration is the ability to keep the mind focused on one thing.
Concentration training at the Novice levels begins by keeping the mind
focused on the breath.

Begin by relaxing and then sitting or lying quietly observing your
breathing. Next, put your attention on your breathing, either at the tip
of your nose or the rising and falling of diaphragm or stomach. Breathe
naturally and don’t be concerned about how well you are breathing or how
aware you are of the breathing; now it is time to emphasize
concentration. Now, focus your mind on your breathing. As soon as you
are aware that your attention has left your breathing, gently and firmly
bring your attention back to your breath. That is all you need to do!

Assignments:

-   ❏ Practice concentration training for a few weeks.

-   ❏ Combine breathwork, awareness, and concentration training into one
    practice. Your focus will move from one breathing area to another.
    But wherever your focus is, whenever your mind leaves the breath,
    you gently and firmly bring it back.

Moving on:

-   ❏ You know the difference between when your mind is focused and when
    it is not.

-   ❏ Even though your mind still jumps around during most practice
    sessions, you periodically have experienced short periods of time
    where your attention stayed on the breath.

Attitude I

Attitude is the mental set with which one approaches situations.
Attitude includes moods, associations, expectations, and intentions.

_Act with Intention_. This means to do the exercises within the book,
not just read and think about them.

_Have Fun_. Relax into the journey and enjoy it.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Intentionally do the exercises at the Novice level.

-   ❏ Reflect on the suggestions related to attitude, and realize that
    whatever your current attitude, it can be improved in ways that will
    help you.

Moving on:

-   ❏ You have completed the exercises at the Novice level.

-   ❏ You have reflected on how to have more fun with the practices, the
    journey, and life in-general.

Flexibility I

With the mental flexibility exercises you will learn to think better and
more creatively. There are two aspects to increase mental flexibility.

_Lateral Thinking_. The purpose is to generate new ideas. Think outside
the box of correctness. Ways: generate to meet a quota of new ideas,
start with the goal and work backwards, brainstorm, random simulation,
question assumptions, break concepts into parts, use analogies, and
challenge categories and labels.

_Mistakes and Being Wrong_. Making mistakes is often the best and
fastest way to learn. Too much avoiding of mistakes can impair mental
flexibility. And in regards to being wrong, mental flexibility is
improved by being open to the fact that you will periodically be wrong,
not being bothered by this fact, and being quick to admit when you are
wrong.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Make up three more strategies for lateral thinking.

-   ❏ Be on alert for times when you are wrong. Seek opportunities to
    admit when you are wrong.

-   ❏ Answer the Mental Play questions at the end of the chapter.

Moving on:

-   ❏ You understand the nature of lateral thinking, and you
    periodically utilize lateral thinking type of strategies.

-   ❏ You have systematically applied lateral thinking to several topics
    of personal significance.

-   ❏ You are free of the mistake mystique and readily notice and admit
    being wrong.

-   ❏ You have identified at least one major area where you were wrong
    and did something to make corrections.


Student

You have the basics in five general areas (concentration, awareness,
breathwork, flexibility, and attitude) and now it is time to further
hone these skills and build on them. Always remember the following:
Learning to use your mind more effectively is one of the most important
things you can do with your life; it will improve almost everything you
do, and thus increase your happiness and health. To do this, you as a
student must spend time developing skills—​reading, thinking, and
wishing will not work. Whatever time you spend developing these skills
you will get back many times over for many reasons, including being more
effective and efficient, and avoiding common traps.

Concentration II

You continue the same basic practice that you already know: you put your
attention on something, such as your breathing at the tip of the nose,
and every time the monkey runs off, you gently and firmly bring your
attention back to your breathing. For the duration of your concentration
practice at the student level is one simple principle: No matter what
arises, treat it as a monkey trick and return to your breath. This
includes all feelings, images, thoughts, and memories. The primary goal
for level II concentration is the further development of one-pointed
concentration despite distractions, and using the breath and other
objects of focus.

Assignments:

-   ❏ What you need to do as a student is add at least two or three new
    objects of concentration to your practice.

-   ❏ Practice _Moment-to-Moment Concentration_. Let your mind go where
    it will; you let go and don’t choose. But wherever your mind goes,
    you try to bring to that object concentrated focus.

Moving on:

-   ❏ You understand the tricks the monkey uses on you, and although it
    still periodically catches you, you don’t stay caught long.

-   ❏ Distractions to your concentration periodically arise, but most of
    the time they are short lived and not troublesome.

-   ❏ You have a clear sense of how to concentrate your mind, and can
    usually easily do it, when you are aware and motivated.

-   ❏ There have been many times in which you have maintained strong
    concentration on some object.

-   ❏ You have developed concentration using your breath as well as
    other objects.

Awareness II

At the novice level, awareness of the body was the major object of
attention. Awareness of your body should always be part of your
practice. From now on you should periodically intentionally focus your
awareness on some part of your body,

At the student level, awareness of feelings is added. There is an
interrelationship between body, feelings, and mind. Feelings in the body
often precede actions and thoughts. Perceptions and thoughts often cause
feelings in your body.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Note                              | Body ←-→ Feelings ←-→ Mind        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Assignments:

-   ❏ Intentionally try to clearly notice wherever your mind goes. Try
    to see clearly whatever arises in your mind, including feelings,
    perceptions, and thoughts.

-   ❏ Experiment with the use of labels.

-   ❏ Combine concentration and awareness training.

-   ❏ After practicing awareness III for awhile, re-take the awareness
    questionnaire.

Moving on:

-   ❏ You have become more aware of your body in a variety of ways and
    regularly, consciously attend to some parts of your body.

-   ❏ You have learned how to cultivate awareness during your way of
    practice.

-   ❏ You know the difference between awareness and concentration.

-   ❏ You can easily be aware of how concentrated your mind is.

-   ❏ You are becoming more aware of how aware you are at any time.

Attitude II

_Make Friends with Yourself_. Unconditionally accept yourself, even when
you are recognizing areas for improvement. If you say you can’t accept
yourself unconditionally, then accept yourself as someone who can’t
accept her or his self unconditionally.

_Be in the Here and Now_. The key to bringing yourself into the here and
now is concentration, with help from awareness. When you are aware that
you are lost in the past or future, you concentrate on something in the
present to bring you back to the here and now.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Reflect on how the four components of attitude be applied to many
    aspects of your life.

-   ❏ Reflect on the four components at least once a week, then once a
    month, and then periodically.

Moving on:

-   ❏ You are continually discovering new ways attitude applies to your
    life and finding more and more depth and subtlety to your
    understanding.

Breathwork II

At the student level you will learn how to further refine and alter your
breathing by changing the rate of inhalation and exhalation. You will
also learn additional ways to use breathing to reduce stress and
anxiety.

You want to exhale when you are contracting, bending forward,
compressing your stomach, or twisting. You want to inhale when are
expanding, bending backward, opening your chest, or coming out of a
stretch.

When you want to relax more, lengthen the time of exhalation and briefly
hold your breath after exhaling. If you are feeling anxious, gradually
lengthen the time of exhalation. If you need more energy, lengthen the
time of inhalation and briefly hold your breath after inhaling.

Some cases of fatigue are helped by first lengthening exhalations for
about a dozen breaths and then gradually lengthening inhalations. And
some cases of depression are helped by having the same length of both
inhalation and exhalation, and then gradually lengthening both.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Observe how long it takes you to inhale versus how long to exhale.

-   ❏ Spend a week of practice time just quietly observing the complete
    breath.

Moving on:

-   ❏ You periodically monitor your breathing in various situations and
    alter it as needed.

-   ❏ You have added to your overall awareness of your complete
    breathing the periodic awareness of the relative lengths of
    inhalation and exhalation.

-   ❏ You have learned how to alter these lengths for the purpose of
    relaxation or energy.

Relaxing

A simple way to relax is to use the 4-2-4-2 controlled breathing
technique. Here you gradually inhale for a count of four, hold your
breath for a count of two, gradually exhale for a count of four, hold
your breath for a count of two, and then begin again.

Relax by imagining a pleasant scene. Practice this with imagined
situations that cause negative emotions.

Moving on:

-   ❏ You have developed your own powerful way to relax using
    breathwork, such as deep breathing and/or 4-2-4-2 breathing.

-   ❏ You have used this relaxation practice many times in real life
    situations.

-   ❏ You are continually becoming more aware of bodily cues related to
    how relaxed you are and changes in this relaxation.

-   ❏ You understand and appreciate how concentration, awareness, and
    breathwork combine to relax body and mind.

Flexibility II

Increasing mental flexibility increases creativity.

Question assumptions such as long held ideas and habit patterns.

Moving on:

-   ❏ Rather than just unconsciously wandering through life, as a
    student you periodically reflect on, and occasionally question, some
    of your habitual perceptions, thoughts, values, and actions.

-   ❏ You have made some important changes in some of your ideas, and
    you have found better ways of doing some things.

-   ❏ Complete mental play puzzles.


Warrior

A key to effective living is learning to be a warrior in everyday
situations, including mental training. Warriors realize that almost
every instant of living is an opportunity to apply or further develop a
mental skill. Perhaps it is a time to concentrate one’s attention, be
more aware of one’s feelings, or question an assumption. There is always
something mentally that can be done, and the warrior understands the
importance of this truth. Training at the warrior level builds on this.

Concentration III

Concentration training at this level begins with finding at least one
situation each day where you can cultivate concentration. Once you are
comfortable with this, then look for several situations each day. Freely
repeat situations that are common or important, such as listening to
people. But variety is also important; continually look for new
situations. Eventually you should be easily doing this many times a day,
usually without much effort. Also, be aware of when you need to quiet
your mind and relax. To become a warrior relative to concentration is to
act on the understanding that basically any situation is an opportunity
to utilize and/or develop concentration skills.

Assignments:

-   ❏ At least once a day you want to identify an addition situation
    where you can develop concentration.

-   ❏ Maintain MTMC keeping your mind focused instant by instant as it
    moves from object to object.

Awareness III

Awareness training at the warrior level also involves bringing awareness
more fully into daily living and developing and applying awareness more
and more. Just about any situation that you are in or any activity you
are doing is an opportunity to cultivate awareness. When cultivating
awareness, try to do an activity as if it was completely new. The
warrior’s goal is to be as aware as possible as often as possible.

1.  Create the time and space to do just one activity. Do not combine
    activities or multitask.

2.  Do the activity slowly.

3.  Take your time, be aware, and enjoy.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Eat a meal with complete awareness, slowly, and by yourself. Then,
    wash the dishes with awareness.

-   ❏ Everyday pick at least one activity to do with full awareness and
    concentration.

-   ❏ Increase the number from one activity to several activities.

-   ❏ Set aside a half day to do everything with complete awareness.

-   ❏ Set aside a full day to do everything with full awareness.

-   ❏ After practicing awareness III for awhile, re-take the awareness
    questionnaire.

Awareness of Pain

Working with pain is one way to brings one focus into the here and now
of direct experience.

1.  Notice the experience of being fully in the here and now.

2.  Try to bring your awareness to the simple sensation of pain, the
    pure sensation before you label it “pain” or respond to it in any
    way. Bring your awareness to the direct contact with the sensation.

Sitting Practice

It is important to continue to develop awareness during your way of
practice, such as sitting and watching your breath.

1.  Notice how your body and mind interact.

2.  Focus on the rising and falling of events in your consciousness.

Awareness While Walking

You can cultivate concentration and awareness while walking in the same
way you cultivated them during sitting.

Slow formal walking. Cultivate awareness as described in this whole
awareness section. Concentration is developed by continually bringing
your attention back to walking. At first, do this for ten to fifteen
minutes and then longer.

Walk at other speeds.

Put attention on breath while walking.

Attitude III

Continue to reflect on the four aspects of attitudes that were
introduced at the first two levels. The warrior sees how these are
applicable to all of living, not just mental training.

-   Have Fun

-   Act with Intention

-   Make Friends with Yourself

-   Be in the Here and Now

_Time-Outs_: Take periodic time outs and days of rest. In addition, go
off on retreats.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Continue to reflect on the four aspects of attitude.

-   ❏ Take increasing amounts of time-outs.

Breathwork III

You will learn here optional breathwork mental practices from pranayama.

_Purifying Breath_: Inhale fully with a deep breath and then exhale most
of the air. At the end of the exhale, stop, then exhale a little more,
stop, exhale a little more, stop, exhale a little more…​Do this until
you can’t exhale any more. All of this is one purifying breath. Do three
purifying breaths in a row.

_Vitalic Breath_: First, breathe in through the nose with a series of
sharp sniffs until the lungs are completely full. Then, blow out sharply
through the mouth with a loud “HAAA.” Do this vitalic breath three times
in a row.

_Alternate Nostril Breathing_: The complete alternate nostril breathing
MIT License

Copyright (c) 1987 William L Mikulas

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
consists of this cycle:

1.  Slowly take a deep breath inhaling through your left nostril for a
    count of 4.

2.  Hold your breath for a count of 4.

3.  Slowly and completely exhale through your right nostril for a count
    of 8.

4.  Slowly and deeply inhale through your right nostril for a count
    of 4.

5.  Hold for a count of 4.

6.  Slowly and completely exhale through your left nostril for a count
    of 8.

Do five to ten of these cycles of alternate nostril breathing, pausing
between each cycle, while letting your breathing flow naturally.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Practice purifying breathing.

-   ❏ Practice vitalic breathing.

-   ❏ Practice alternate nostril breathing.

Flexibility III

Flexibility at the warrior levels involves looking at attachments,
meditation, and mental play.

Attachments

Attachments are obstacles to mental flexibility. Attachments are bad and
lead to suffering. Being a warrior includes the willingness and desire
to be in the world in the midst of attachments, confronting and reducing
them. Sometimes this is difficult, but the warrior is up to the
challenge. Attachments are the grist for the mill, opportunities for
significant personal and spiritual growth.

Attitude: take delight in discovering an attachment. Make friends with
yourself.

Awareness: First, notice the results of an attachment such as an
undesired emotion. Then, go back in time to see if you can identify the
attachment which was the cause.

Action: What do you do to reduce the attachment.

-   ❏ Identify a wide range of attachments at play in your life.

-   ❏ Write them down

-   ❏ Devise a plan to reduce the important ones

Meditation

The practice of meditation consists of four components:

1.  Form

2.  Behaviors of the mind

3.  Attitude

4.  Object

Your training in concentration and awareness will strongly help you in
many of the world’s spiritual traditions. If you are at the Warrior
level, you already have advanced skills for meditation in all of these
traditions.

Mental Play

The playful warrior recognizes that having fun is not only pleasurable
but also good for the health of body, mind, and spirit. The warrior
brings the attitude of having fun to as many activities as possible. The
warrior looks for and creates many opportunities to play. And the
warrior understands playtime as a time to be in the here and how, a time
to be free and open to novelty and surprise, and a time for creativity
and lateral thinking.

The world’s best non-gambling strategy games:

-   Chess

-   Go

-   Duplicate Bridge

Warriors find games that they and various friends enjoy. Most important,
warriors enjoy playing with all aspects of living with all of its
interesting challenges.

-   ❏ Learn a new game (chess, go, or bridge).


Adept

At the adept level you will come to appreciate more how everything is
interrelated.

Concentration IV

Adept concentration is based on the understanding that any situation is
an opportunity to further refine one’s concentration. Thus, every
situation is a chance to do one or more of the following: be aware of
how concentrated your mind is, actively quiet and focus your mind more,
and keep your attention focused.

The level is also an opportunity to further refine Moment-To-Moment
Concentration (MTMC).

Assignments:

-   ❏ Read through the Awareness Questionnaire and consider how both
    concentration and awareness apply to what is being asked.

Awareness IV

Awareness training at the adept level is based on the fact that every
situation is an opportunity to develop awareness.

1.  Create the time and space to do just one activity. Do not combine
    activities or multitask.

2.  Do the activity slowly.

3.  Take your time, be aware, and enjoy.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Eat a meal with complete awareness, slowly, and by yourself. Then,
    wash the dishes with awareness.

-   ❏ Everyday pick at least one activity to do with full awareness and
    concentration.

-   ❏ Increase the number from one activity to several activities.

-   ❏ Set aside a half day to do everything with complete awareness.

-   ❏ Set aside a full day to do everything with full awareness.

-   ❏ After practicing awareness III for awhile, re-take the awareness
    questionnaire.

Awareness of Pain

Working with pain is one way to brings one focus into the here and now
of direct experience.

1.  Notice the experience of being fully in the here and now.

2.  Try to bring your awareness to the simple sensation of pain, the
    pure sensation before you label it “pain” or respond to it in any
    way. Bring your awareness to the direct contact with the sensation.

Sitting Practice

It is important to continue to develop awareness during your way of
practice, such as sitting and watching your breath.

1.  Notice how your body and mind interact.

2.  Focus on the rising and falling of events in your consciousness.

Awareness While Walking

You can cultivate concentration and awareness while walking in the same
way you cultivated them during sitting.

Slow formal walking. Cultivate awareness as described in this whole
awareness section. Concentration is developed by continually bringing
your attention back to walking. At first, do this for ten to fifteen
minutes and then longer.

Walk at other speeds.

Put attention on breath while walking.

Attitude III

Continue to reflect on the four aspects of attitudes that were
introduced at the first two levels. The warrior sees how these are
applicable to all of living, not just mental training.

-   Have Fun

-   Act with Intention

-   Make Friends with Yourself

-   Be in the Here and Now

_Time-Outs_: Take periodic time outs and days of rest. In addition, go
off on retreats.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Continue to reflect on the four aspects of attitude.

-   ❏ Take increasing amounts of time-outs.

Breathwork III

You will learn here optional breathwork mental practices from pranayama.

_Purifying Breath_: Inhale fully with a deep breath and then exhale most
of the air. At the end of the exhale, stop, then exhale a little more,
stop, exhale a little more, stop, exhale a little more…​Do this until
you can’t exhale any more. All of this is one purifying breath. Do three
purifying breaths in a row.

_Vitalic Breath_: First, breathe in through the nose with a series of
sharp sniffs until the lungs are completely full. Then, blow out sharply
through the mouth with a loud “HAAA.” Do this vitalic breath three times
in a row.

_Alternate Nostril Breathing_: The complete alternate nostril breathing
consists of this cycle:

1.  Slowly take a deep breath inhaling through your left nostril for a
    count of 4.

2.  Hold your breath for a count of 4.

3.  Slowly and completely exhale through your right nostril for a count
    of 8.

4.  Slowly and deeply inhale through your right nostril for a count
    of 4.

5.  Hold for a count of 4.

6.  Slowly and completely exhale through your left nostril for a count
    of 8.

Do five to ten of these cycles of alternate nostril breathing, pausing
between each cycle, while letting your breathing flow naturally.

Assignments:

-   ❏ Practice purifying breathing.

-   ❏ Practice vitalic breathing.

-   ❏ Practice alternate nostril breathing.

Flexibility III

Flexibility at the warrior levels involves looking at attachments,
meditation, and mental play.

Attachments

Attachments are obstacles to mental flexibility. Attachments are bad and
lead to suffering. Being a warrior includes the willingness and desire
to be in the world in the midst of attachments, confronting and reducing
them. Sometimes this is difficult, but the warrior is up to the
challenge. Attachments are the grist for the mill, opportunities for
significant personal and spiritual growth.

Attitude: take delight in discovering an attachment. Make friends with
yourself.

Awareness: First, notice the results of an attachment such as an
undesired emotion. Then, go back in time to see if you can identify the
attachment which was the cause.

Action: What do you do to reduce the attachment.

-   ❏ Identify a wide range of attachments at play in your life.

-   ❏ Write them down

-   ❏ Devise a plan to reduce the important ones

Meditation

The practice of meditation consists of four components:

1.  Form

2.  Behaviors of the mind

3.  Attitude

4.  Object

Your training in concentration and awareness will strongly help you in
many of the world’s spiritual traditions. If you are at the Warrior
level, you already have advanced skills for meditation in all of these
traditions.

Mental Play

The playful warrior recognizes that having fun is not only pleasurable
but also good for the health of body, mind, and spirit. The warrior
brings the attitude of having fun to as many activities as possible. The
warrior looks for and creates many opportunities to play. And the
warrior understands playtime as a time to be in the here and how, a time
to be free and open to novelty and surprise, and a time for creativity
and lateral thinking.

The world’s best non-gambling strategy games:

-   Chess

-   Go

-   Duplicate Bridge

Warriors find games that they and various friends enjoy. Most important,
warriors enjoy playing with all aspects of living with all of its
interesting challenges.

-   ❏ Learn a new game (chess, go, or bridge).


Appendix A: Progress Chart

As you complete tasks tick the appropriate box below to mark your
progress.

+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Skill    | Novice   | Student  | Warrior  | Adept    | Master    |
+==========+==========+==========+==========+==========+===========+
| Concentr |          |          |          |          |           |
| ation    |          |          |          |          |           |
+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Awarenes |          |          |          |          |           |
| s        |          |          |          |          |           |
+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Mental   |          |          |          |          |           |
| Flexibil |          |          |          |          |           |
| ity      |          |          |          |          |           |
+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Attitude |          |          |          |          |           |
+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+
| Breathwo |          |          |          |          |           |
| rk       |          |          |          |          |           |
+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+

: Table 1. Progression

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Four Foundations of Mindfulness.

Version 1.0
Last updated 2020-01-29 11:44:14 +0630
